INSECT PESTS AND DISEASES OF
RICE IN AFRICA
M. S. ALAM, V. T. JOHN, AND KAUNG ZAN
Rice is the staple food of more than half of mankind, and 90% of the world's rice is
produced and consumed in Asia. Although Africa's rice area is only 3.5% of the
worlds total area and about 2.2% of its total production, rice production in Africa
registered a steady increase from 1961-65 to 1982. However, the per hectare yields
in the major rice-growing countries in tropical Africa, excluding Egypt, have
remained low in general.
Rice production is affected by a wide range of insects, diseases, weeds, birds,
and other vertebrate pests. Insects and diseases are two major constraints that
limit rice production in Asia and Africa. Figures on crop loss due to insect and
disease attack are not widely available. Cramer (19) estimated the world's average
yield loss at about one-third of the value of the crop: 13.8% is caused by insect
pests, 11.6% by diseases, and 9.5% by weeds. Barr et al (13) estimated that the yield
loss attributable to insects, diseases, and weeds in Africa was 33.7% of potential
production of which insects and diseases account for 14.4 and 5.8%, respectively.
MAJOR INSECT PESTSOF RICE
In Africa more than 80 species of insects have been reported to attack rice, but
only about 15 species are considered important. Because of the diverse conditions
under which rice is grown, from temperate to tropical areas and in different
altitudes, pest problems also vary from one area to another. Most insect species
causing damage to rice in Africa are indigenous species, different from those
found in Asia (Fig. 1). Within Africa, the severity of rice insect pests differs
considerably in different climatic zones and ecosystems (Table 1,2). The insect
pests of rice in Africa are classified according to the plant parts they damage:
internal stem feeder, leaf feeder, leaf and stem sucker, grain sucker, and root
feeder. The relationship of crop phenology and field infestation of major insect
pests in irrigated rice in Nigeria is shown in Fig. 2.
Entomologist. pathologist, and IRRI liaison scientist, International institute ofTropical Agriculture,
Ibadan, Nigeria.



68 RICE IMPROVEMENT IN EASTERN, CENTRAL, AND SOUTHERN. AFRICA
Africa
Asia
Grain suckers
Stenocons spp.
Leptocarisa acuta
Aspavia spp.
Ear-cutter
Mythimna spp.
Nilaparvata meander - Nilaporvata lugens
Nephotettix spp.
Nephatettix: spp.
Stemo and leaf: suckers
Sogotodes cubanm -
Sogatella furcifera
White flies
Brevennia rehi
Mites
Thrips
Epilachna similis
Dicladispa ormigera
Leaf feeders
Nymphula stagnalis
Cnaphalocrosis medinalis
Hlspids
Hydrellia spp.
Hydrellias sp.
Nymphula depunctalis
Spodoptera: sp.
Spodoptera mauritia
Chilo spp
Tryporyza incertulas
Moliarpha sgaratella Chilospp.
Internal stem feeders
Sesamiaspp.
Sesamia inferens
Diopsis spp
Orseolia oryzae
Orseolia oryzivora
Termites
Mole cricket
Root feeders
Mole cricket
Termites
Root aphid
Potentia/pests
1. Insect pests of major importance to rice in Africa and Asia (9).
Table 1. Prevalence of rice pests in the major climate zones (2, 3, 9).
Insects
Humid
Guinea
Sudanian
tropical
savanna
savanna
Maliarpha separatella
++
++
Chilo spp.
++
+
++
Sesamia spp.
++
Diopsis spp.
++
Orseolia oryzivora
++
Grain suckers
++
White fly
++
Termite
++
Armyworm
Nymphula depunctalis
++
Whorl maggot
Black beetle
Aphid
Mole cricket
Hispa
+
Leaf folder
+
++ - abundant, + - present but not abundant, - = not present



INSECT PESTS AND DISEASES OF RICE IN AFRICA 69
Table 2. The relative occurrence of insect pests in different eco-
systems (2, 3, 9).
Insect
Upland
Lowland
Irrigated
Maliarpha separatella
++
+++
+++
Chilo spp.
++
++
++
Sesamia spp.
++
Diopsis spp.
+
+++
Orseolia oryzivora
++
Nymphula stagnalis
++
Grain suckers
++
++
Termite
++
Epilachna sirilis
++
Army worm
++
+
Aphid
+
Mole cricket
++
Whorl maggot
*
White fly
Black beetle
Leaf folder
+
Hispa
+
++
t
+++ = widely abundant, ++ = abundant, + = present but not abun-
dant, = not present
I I
Vegetative phose
Reproductive
Ripening
phase
phase
Diopsis
-
N
Stem borers
Grain suckers
Gall midge
-

Whorl maggot
Case worm
-
Period of activity
Period of peak activity
-
2. Major insect pests of lowland rice in Nigeria and their relation to growth stages of plant (9).



70 RICE IMPROVEMENT IN EASTERN, CENTRAL, AND SOUTHERN AFRICA
Internal stem feeders
Among the insects attacking rice, internal stem feeders generally cause the most
damage. In this group, lepidopterous borers and two dipteran, the stalk-eyed fly
and GM, are important. To their feeding habits and the late appearance of external
injury symptoms, their presence usually remains undetected for some time.
Among the internal stem feeders, SBs including stalk-eyed fly, are most
widespread and observed more frequently than GM. In Africa, SBs, mainly
Pyralidae, such as Chilo, Maliarpha, Scirpophaga, and Adelphrupa genera,
and the Noctuidae, such as Sesamia genus, are reported (7). Among these, three
species, named according to the color of the full-grown larvae, are white SB,
Malarphaseparatela, striped SB (Chilo spp.), and pink SB (Sesamia spp.) are
common in Africa.
White stem borer (Maliarpha separatella Rag.). Only one species in this genus
is considered a rice pest. It is predominant in all rice ecosystems in Africa. The
adult moth is yellow, with a reddish-brown line along the edge of the forewings.
Unlike other SBs, its infestation is reported to not produce the usual symptoms of
"dead heart" or "white head," but if the infestation is at early flowering stage and
feeding damage is serious then sometimes "white head" symptoms appear. The
damage on the rice stem is very typical; perforated knots with necrosis inside the
internode (37). Some yield components, such as number and weight of filled
grains, are affected by the attack of this insect (7, 26). During adverse
environmental conditions, larvae of white SB can undergo diapause in rice
stubble.
Pink stem borer (Sesamia spp.) This is the most polyphagous insect among
the borers. It is more destructive on upland than lowland and irrigated rice. Two
major species, S. calamistis and S. botanephaga, are present in Africa. S.
calamistis seems to be the most common in east and west Africa, Malagasy, and
southern Africa (17, 18). Generally the adult moth is light brown. The larvae feed
inside the stem, cutting off the growing part of the plant from the base, causing the
tiller to die. This condition during vegetative stage is known as "dead heart.*
Similar damage during flowering stage results in empty white panicles known as
"white head."
Striped stem borer (Chilo spp.). Several species of Chilo are reported as rice
pests in Africa, but Chilo zacconius, C. diffusilineus, and C. partellus are most
common. Chilo species are also polyphagous. Adults are pale yellow with
irregular black spots on the forewings and wing tips. After hatching, the young
larva feeds on the leaves and then bores into the stem. As a result of larvae feeding
inside the stem, the plant shows "dead heart" and "white head' symptoms at the
vegetative and reproductive stages, respectively.
Stalk-eyed fly. Indigenous to Africa, there are many species of Diopsis, but the
most important species are Diopsis (thoracica) macrophthalma, D. apicalis, and
D. collaris. Among these, D. macrophthalma is predominant (18, 11). It is more
abundant in humid tropical and Guinea savanna than in Sudanian savanna zones.
It is more serious in irrigated and lowland rice ecosystems than in upland rice. It
generally attacks the rice plant at the early tillering stage. Peak infestation usually
occurs between 20 to 40 DT (11). "Dead heart" damage, similar to that caused by



INSECT PESTS AND DISEASES OF RICE IN AFRICA 71
lepidopterous SBs occurs. Late infestation can also cause *'white head'
symptoms, but this is not very common. The adults are easy to recognize by two
long projections at the side of the head with eyes on the tips and two big spines on
the thorax. D. macrophthalma is bigger than D. apicalis and D. collaris.
Moreover, the wings of D. macrophthalma are transparent and have no black
spots at the tips whereas in D. apicalis and D. collaris, there are black spots at the
wing tips.
Gall midge (Orseolia oryzivora H and G). The GM is well established in
countries of Guinea and Sudan savanna, such as Sudan, Cameroon, Mali, Upper
Volta, Ivory Coast, Senegal, Guinea Bissau, and Nigeria (12, 23, 25, 14). This
species is morphologically distinct from the Asian species. It is one of the most
serious and widespread pests in Upper Volta in irrigated, rainfed, or lowland rice
(14). The adult fly is about the size of a mosquito, nocturnal, and phototropic. The
feeding of the maggot stimulates the leaf sheath to grow into a gall (silver shoot).
Tillers with galls do not bear panicles.
In addition to the direct feeding, the GLHS and planthoppers are vectors of
several virus diseases in Asia. In Latin America, planthoppers, Sogatodes
oryzicola and S. cubanus, are vectors of hoja blanca virus disease. In Africa,
Sogatodes cubanus is reported on rice and maize fields but feeds mainly on
grasses. Fortunately, none of these virus diseases existing in Asia and Latin
America is detected in Africa yet.
White fly. With recent increases in rice cultivation, the incidence of white fly is
gradually increasing. There are two species of white flies which have so far been
reported to infest rice plants in Africa, namely Aleurocybotus indicus and
Trialeurodes oryzae (20). Trialeurodes is more common in Upper Volta during
the hot DS, but Aleurocybotus indicus is common in irrigated rice in the Senegal
river valley. From February to April in 1983, white-fly infestation was also observed
in paddy screen houses and irrigated rice fields on IITAS farm at Ibadan, Nigeria
(Alam, 1983 unpublished). White fly outbreaks depend on environmental
conditions; high temperature and low humidity favor its rapid development. The
incidence of this insect is also reported in Mauritania (2, 3).
Leafhoppers. Two species of GLHS, Nephotettix modulatus and Nephotettix
afer, are found in Africa.
Planthoppers. In this group, there are mainly species of the genus Nilaparvata,
Sogatella, and Sogatodes. In Africa, some species of Nilaparvata and Sogatodes
are present. Nilaparvata meander was reported in Sudan and French Guinea
(21). In Nigeria BPH was reported (39) and hopper burn was noticed in one field at
Ibadan in 1983 (8).
Grain suckers
There are at least 15 species of grain suckers that have been reported in Africa (1).
Of these, Aspavia armigera, Stenocoris claviformis, Reptortus sp., Nezara sp.,
and Miperus sp. are important. Both adults and nymphs cause damage to
developing grains. The damaged grains have diffused brown spots at the point of
feeding. Heavily damaged grains are either partially filled or empty.



72 RICEI IMPROVEMENT IN EASTERN, CENTRAL, AND SOUTHERN AFRICA
Root feeders
In this group, termites, mole crickets, black beetles, and aphids are important.
Termites. Among termites, Microtermes and Macrotermes species have been
reported as pests of rainfed upland rice. They attack the plants below the ground
level. As a result of their attack, the plant shows wilting symptoms and ultimately
dies. If the infestation occurs at booting or flowering stage, "white head"
symptoms also appear.
Mole crickets. Both nymphs and adults of the mole cricket burrow along
beneath the soil surface and attack the plants below ground close to the roots.
Generally, this brown insect occurs only on upland rice or on irrigated rice if there
is nadequate water supply. Young seedlings are most commonly attacked.
Aphids. There are two species of aphids which have been reported to attack the
roots of upland rice plants in Sierra Leone (4). Generally, hot dry weather
encourages the build-up of the colony. During the late harmattan season in
December 1982, the aphids, Rhopalosiphum padi (L) and Tetraneura nigriab-
dominalis Sasaki were observed feeding on the roots of some upland rice
varieties at IITA in Ibadan, Nigeria (5).
CONTROL
Insects can be controlled by chemical, cultural, and biological methods. Of these,
the conventional method of insect control is chemical because of its immediate
impact on the target pest. However, chemical control of rice insect pests is not
Table 3. Major insect pests of rice for which varietal resistance has
been recorded (10, 30, 31, 36, 38).
Progress in
Common name
Scientific name
breeding
for resistance
Yellow stemborer
Scirpophaga incertulas
A, B
Striped borer
Chilo suppressalis
A, B
Chilo zacconius
A
Pink borer
Sesarnia spp.
A
White stemborer
Maliarpha separatella
A
Stalk -eyed fly
Diopsis macrophthalma
A
Gall midge
Orseolia spp.
A, B,C, D
Brown planthopper
Nilaparvata lugens
A, B, C, D
Green leafhopper
Nephotettix virescens
A, B, C
Whitebacked
planthopper Sogarella furcifera
A, B, C
Rice whorl maggot
Hydrellia philippina
A, B
Rice delphacid
Sogatodes orizicola
A, B
Rice bug
Leptocorisa varicomis
A, C
Rice stink bug
Oebalus pugnax
A
Rice leaf folder
Cnaphalocrosis medinalis
A
Rice hispa
Dicladispa armigera
A
Rice thrips
Baliothrips biformis
A
Zigzag rice leafhopper
Recilia dorsalis
A
Rice caseworm
Nymphula stagnalis
A
A = sources of resistance identified. B = resistant varieties released.
C = genes for resistance identified. D = insect biotypes encountered.



INSECT PESTS AND DISEASES OF RICE IN AFRICA 73
Table 4. Varieties/lines tested against major insect pests of rice at
IITA.
Varieties
Insect
Varieties
identified
Condition of
tested
as resistant
test
(no.)
(no.)
Pink borer (Sesamia spp.) 800
6
Field and
screenhouse
White borer
(Maliarpha separatella)
2,000
5
Field
Striped borer
(Chilo zacconius)
600
10
Screenhouse
Stalk-eyed fly
(Diopsis macrophthalma) 2,036
35
Screenhouse
Whorl maggot
(Hydrellia sp.)
430
2
Field
Caseworm
(Nymphula stagnalis)
700
4
Field
Gall midge
(Orseolia oryzivora)
244
6
Field
6,810
68
always rewarding. Failure to apply the right insecticide at the right time and at the
right dosage often leads to decreased benefits to the farmer. Consistent use of
insecticide has led to the development of resistance of some rice insects to certain
insecticides. Therefore, a successful pest control program will have to utilize not
only chemicals, but also other components which will be more effective, less
costly, and easily adaptable by farmers.
Different cultural control methods can be effectively used against pests. Use of
R varieties is one of the most effective methods of controlling insect pests. It
provides an inexpensive method of insect control and is compatible with other
control methods in the IPM approach. To date, varietal resistance has been
recorded for about 19 insect pests of rice, and varieties resistant to 8 insects have
also been released (Table 3). IRRI and some countries in Asia have developed
several varieties with resistanceto SBs, GLHS, BPHS, and GM, but most of the insect
species of rice in Africa are different from those found in Asia. As such, the insect
resistant varieties developed at IRRI or other Asian countries may or may not be
best suited for use in Africa for controlling insects. Therefore, at IITA major efforts
have been made to identify the sources of resistance to African species of SBs
(white, pink, and striped), stalk-eyed fly, GM, RCW, and RWM. The success of
resistance breeding depends to a great extent on the development of suitable
screening techniques. At IITA, screening techniques against stalk-eyed fly and
pink SB have been developed. A total of 6810 varieties/lines were screened at IITA
against 7 insect species. This led to the identification of 68 varieties as R or MR
(Table 4). Some selected R sources are listed in Table 5. Unfortunately, most of
the varieties identified as R or MR have poor agronomic characteristics and
yielding ability. Therefore, a breeding program has been initiated utilizing R
donors to develop varieties R to insect pests. The search will also be continued to



74 RICE IMPROVEMENT IN EASTERN, CENTRAL, AND SOUTHERN. AFRICA
Table 5. Sources of resistanceto major insect pests in Africa (27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 38).
African striped
Stalk -eyed fly
African pink
stem borer
stem borer
TOS 2513
IR579-160
W1263
Taitung 16
Iguape Cateto
Taitung 16
PR403
Leuang 28-1-64
SML81B
ITA6-20-1-BPI
DNJ171
DNJ171
IR503-1-91-3-2-1
CTG680
DNJ146
PR325
IR589-53-2
Sikasso
H8
E. L. Golpher
Ratna
IR 1561 -38-6-5
African white borer
Malagkit Sungsong
Huange-sengoo
ITA6-4-2
SML81B
TD10A
IR1168-76a
Magoti
IR1561-38-6-5a
Gall midge
TOg 6324
ITA7-7-2a
W 1263
TOg 6367
TKM6 -
BW100
TOg 5560
PTB18
TOg 6481
Caseworm
PTB21
TOg 6399
IRRI Acc. 6621
PTB10
TOg 6390
IRRI Acc. 12580
TOg 6392
IRRI Acc. 12556
Whorl maggot
ITA121
IRRI Acc. 20427
IR430-373-1-3
DJ12-539-2*
Taitung 314
HPU741*
Moderately resistant.
find better sources of resistance in varieties with good agronomic characteristics
and high-yield potential.
Agronomic practices have some potential for reducing the population of many
pest species and of increasing the beneficial ones. Closer spacing in mangrove
swamp decreases the infestation of Maliarpha separatella (3). Infestation of SBs
can also be reduced by shifting planting time. Rice planted late (after July) had
higher infestation rates of all of the three major lepidopterous borers than those
planted at the beginning of the season (6). During the infestation period, some
mechanical methods can be used effectively to minimize populations of SBs and
GM. Adults of lepidopterous borers and GM may be trapped and killed by a
kerosene lantern as a light trap and a trough filled with a kerosene-water mixture
(I part kerosene in 10 parts water) placed under the light trap. CW infestation can
be reduced by draining water from the infested field and keeping the field dry for
3.4 d. If draining water from the infested field is not possible, a small amount of
kerosene can be added to the water surface to kill the floating CW larvae.
Collecting of grain-sucking bugs in the afternoon by sweep net and killing them in
kerosene water may also be practiced.
Another approach to insect control is by insect pest management, the
manipulation of pest or potential pest populations sO as to diminish their injury or
render them harmless (22). Surveillance, monitoring, and forecasting of pests
form major components of pest management (16). IPM systems for rice are in
varying stages of development throughout Asia (24). Although WARDA has



INSECT PESTS AND DISEASES OF RICE IN AFRICA 75
initiated a pest management program in West Africa, a lot of fundamental
information on the biology and ecology of insect pests and their natural enemies
is still needed.
MAJOR DISEASES OF RICE
Although about 70 major and minor diseases of rice have been listed by Ou (35),
this paper will restrict itself to the more common ones reported in Africa (Table 6).
Blast
Rice BI caused by Pyricularia oryzae Cav. is the most common and severe
disease of rice in Africa. The disease is especially severe in upland and drought-
prone areas, affecting leaves, nodes, and floral parts, particularly the neck of the
panicle.
Distribution. The disease is reportedly serious in Ghana, Mali, Nigeria, Togo,
Upper Volta, Guinea Bissau, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Malagasy (41). It has also
been observed in high altitude, low-temperature-prone areas of Cameroon.
Although details of the occurrence of this disease in other parts of Africa are not
available, it is logical to expect that the disease is widespread in Africa.
Symptoms. BI on leaves is identified particularly by characteristic spindle-
shaped lesions. The disease, however, starts as pin-point lesions, and depending
upon the susceptibility of the variety and the favorability of the environment, can
kill the entire leaf or plant. A detailed scale for rating the disease reaction on leaves
is given in the Standard Evaluation System for Rice (32).
The most serious stage of the disease is neck BI, or rotten neck, which
usually is seen as a blackish necrotic area at the base of the panicle. Sometimes
the infection also occurs at the rachis or rachilla causing varying degrees of
Table 6. The parts of plant affected by more common rice diseases and the pathogens involved.
Disease
Part of plant affected
Causal organism
Blast
Leaf, node flowering axis. Pyricularia oryzae Cav.
Leaf scald
Mature leaves
Monographella albesens (= Rhyncos-
porium oryzae)
Sheath blight
Leaf sheaths, leaves
Thanetophorus cucumeris (Rhizoc-
tonia solani)
Sheath rot
Flag leaf sheath
Acrocylindrium oryzae
Narrow brown leaf spot Leaves
Cercospora oryzae
Brown spot
Leaves, spikelets
Helminthosporium oryzae
Glume discoloration
Spikelets
Acrocylindriur oryzae
Curvularia sp.
Alternaria (Trichochonis)
Fusarium sp.
False smut
Spikelets
Utilaginoidea virens
Bacterial blight
Tillers, leaves
Xanthomonas campestris pv. oryzae
Bacterial streak
Leaves
Xanthomonas oryzae f. sp. oryzicola
Rice yellow mottlea
Whole plant
Rice yellow mottle virus
aAfrican specific. The rest are reported in most rice-growing countries.



76 RICE IMPROVEMENT IN EASTERN, CENTRAL, AND SOUTHERN AFRICA
sterility of grains. In susceptible varieties, the nodes of the flowering axis are also
infected, causing the panicle to break at the nodes.
Factors favoring the disease. BI is aggravated by drought, low light intensity,
and nutritional imbalances, especially K deficiency. At Suakoko station in Liberia,
IR3880-17, C22, B3451-220-57, and IRAT13 have been identified as R to BI. These,
however, need to be confirmed in other locations. Other factors that favor the
disease are: excessive N supply, close planting, heavy dew formation, change in
the virulence of the causal pathogen, and the susceptibility of the host variety.
Temperature also plays an important role; relatively lower temperatures (20-
28° C) are more conducive to infection; thus, the disease is more severe in cooler
locations and/or in cooler months.
Resistance. Many rice varieties with superior resistance to BI have been
identified by carefully controlled screening tests (15). These varieties have shown
resistance at several places in multilocational trials. Table 7 lists varieties from
different sources with resistance to BI.
Brown spot
Caused by Cochliobolus miyabeanus (Helminthosporlum oryzae), BS has
been reported from upland, hydromorphic, mangrove, and lowland ecologies of
several countries in Africa. Severe infection of rice plants by BS is reported from
Benin, Mali, Nigeria, and Upper Volta (41).
Symptoms. Brown spots, oval or oblong usually with a yellow halo around each,
are seen on leaves. The spots vary in size and number: the larger spots are
sometimes 5 mm long. The susceptibility of a variety is often determined by the
area affected by the spot. Infection can also occur on seedlings, which often leads
to the death of seedlings. Seed infection is characterized by spots on the grains.
Table 7. Resistant varieties for rice diseases.
Resistant donors
Disease
Tall
Dwarf
Blast
Tetep
ITA257
Lac 23
ITA120
OS6
ITA 150
Moroberekan
IRAT13
IRAT14
Leaf scald a
Rernadja
Sheath blight a
Ta-poo-cho-z
Pankaj
Dissi Hatif
Bacterial blight a
BJ1
IET4141
DV85
Cempo Selak
Rice yellow mottle
LAC23
Moroberekan
IR1846-293-3
OS6
a Results from tests outside Africa.



INSECT PESTS AND DISEASES OF RICE IN AFRICA 77
Leaf scald
This disease caused by Monographella albescens (Rhyncosprium oryzae)
has been reported in upland, swamp, and irrigated ecologies.
Distribution. Occurrence of leaf scald in Benin, Ghana, Ivory Coast, Liberia,
Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Upper Volta has been confirmed (41). The
disease is especially severe in high rainfall areas of West Africa although
information on the occurrence of the disease in east, central, and south Africa is
scanty.
Symptoms. The symptoms of the disease are seen mainly on leaves. The
infection starts from leaf tips or margins as brown necrotic areas and the lesions
gradually progress, under favorable conditions, to form successive light-brown
and dark-brown bands. The area affected on the leaf varies from negligible to
about 50% with older leaves more affected than younger ones.
Leaf scald is reported on varieties with excess foliage and under heavy
fertilization. Varieties with broad leaves show more infection than those with
narrow leaves. Similarly, low light intensity due to overcast sky tends to increase
disease.
Resistance of a high order for this disease has yet to be detected.
Sheath blight
The disease caused by Thanetophorus cucumeris (Rhizoctonia solani) is
becoming a serious problem in some ricegrowing countries of Africa.
Symptoms. Under normal circumstances ShB is often inconspicuous, restrict-
ing itself to basal leaf sheaths of dying tillers. The basal sheaths often display
oblong blotches usually with water-soaked areas and with light-brown peripheries.
Under favorable conditions of high humidity, shade. and heavy N fertilization, ShB
moves to the upper leaves that often display band-like zonation, killing the leaves.
In extreme cases. ShB reaches the panicles, killing the entire plant or tillers.
Sclerotia are seen on the affected parts. These are whitish when young but dark
brown when old. In extreme cases, the tillers die resembling the "kresek phase"
of BLB.
Varieties R to this disease have not yet been found although a few tolerant
varieties have been reported in Asia (Table 7).
Sheath rot
Caused by Acrocylindrium oryzae, sheath rot is becoming important in many
lowland areas particularly subjected to low temperature (around 20°C) during
flowering period. It is more appropriate to say that sheath rot is a condition which
arises out of a situation where the panicles get choked.
Symptoms. Sheath rot is characterized by oblong to irregular brown blotches
formed at the base of the flag-leaf sheath covering the panicles. Severe infection
reveals visible mycelium (whitish in color) inside the flag-leaf sheath. This leads to
infection of the spikelets as they emerge from the infected sheath and often the
panicles are incompletely exserted. The affected panicles are often sterile,
discolored, and with dark patches.



78 RICE IMPROVEMENT IN EASTERN, CENTRAL, AND SOUTHERN AFRICA
Glume discoloration
Glume or grain discoloration is often a complex syndrome where saprophytic/
pathogenic organisms are involved, and several species of fungi are implicated
(35). Grain discoloration can be the result of other infections also as in sheath rot
or due to cold or drought-induced choking of the panicles. However, when
incubated the infected grains revealed the presence of the following organisms as
major ones at IITA (34): Acrocylindrium oryzae; Alternaria (Trichochonis
padwickii); Curvularia sp. (black kernel); Fusarium sp.; and Nigrospora oryzae
(grain spot).
Symptoms. Discoloration is partial or complete and may restrict itself to the
glumes or may extend to the kernel. When the kernels are affected germination is
reduced. Grain discoloration is a serious problem since discolored grains have
poor marketability and milling recovery.
In heavy rainfall areas the discoloration is quite serious since high moisture
tends to promote colonization of these fungi. By contrast, in drier weather, there is
less disease. Wounds caused by the feeding of insects are yet another
predisposing factor for this disease. The syndrome is more pronounced on
high-yielding varieties grown under upland than under lowland conditions.
Varietal screening is in progress to identify varieties with tolerance to grain
discoloration.
Bacterial leaf blight
The causal agent of BLB, Xanthomonas campetris pv. oryzae, has been reported
in Cameroon, Malagasy, Niger, and Mali (33, 41). This disease can be a serious
constraint in lowland rice production.
Symptoms. At tillering stage BLB is characterized by death of tillers (kresek
stage or wilt phase). Affected tillers wilt and die, resembling "dead hearts" caused
by SBs. However, unlike the dead hearts, the wilted tillers will not dislodge easily
when pulled, and the basal portion is slimy when crushed due to the presence of
abundant bacterial cells.
After the maximum tillering stage, the more common BLB symptoms are seen.
The margins and apices show wilted, greyish, necrotic, water-soaked tissue, and
the border between wilted and green area is wavy. When infected leaves are cut
transversely and dipped in distilled water, the bacterial ooze can be seen from the
vascular tissue. Excessive N application and low light intensity (shade) can
increase disease severity.
Rice yellow mottle virus disease
Unlike other rice virus diseases, the African-specific RYMV is easily transmitted
mechanically by sap inoculation. Insects with chewing mouth parts, such as
Chaetocnema beetles, are also known to transmit the disease in the field. RYMV is
reported mainly in irrigated or lowland paddy in several African countries, such as
Kenya, Nigeria, Niger, and Upper Volta.
Symptoms. The infected plants are generally stunted, the leaves showing
yellow discoloration to light-yellow mottling depending upon varieties. Some
show orange discoloration while many African-specific upland varieties are highly



INSECT PESTS AND DISEASES OF RICE IN AFRICA 79
tolerant to RYMV. Young plants are more susceptible to RYMV than older ones,
and ifthe infection is severe, flowering is affected. Seed setting is extremely poor in
severe cases.
Recently, the wild rice species, Oryza longistaminata, has been found to
harbor the virus (33) under natural conditions. This suggests that field spread of
the virus might result from this species.
BREEDING FOR DISEASE RESISTANCE
The major objective for disease control is to breed R varieties. Although, R
varieties are not available for all diseases, donors are available for some (Table 7).
CONTROL
Losses from rice diseases in Africa must be minimized. It is essential that the rice
disease situation in each country and in each location be studied with reference to
seasonality, intensity, and yield loss. With such information it is possible to use the
following strategies to control or minimize losses from these diseases:
Use of resistant varieties - Genetically R or tolerant varieties are preferred
whenever such varieties are available. For instance, several BI resistant
varieties are available for lowland and upland ecologies, and BI can be greatly
minimized by growing such varieties. Similarly, varieties with high levels of
tolerance to BLB are available, and if these are tested in disease-prone areas
and their resistance is confirmed, then these can be directly introduced or
used in an appropriate breeding program.
Judicious use of N fertifizer - Diseases such as BI, ShB, leaf scald, and BLB
are aggravated with increased application of N. Therefore, it is necessary to
monitor the plant health when N application is contemplated. While fertilizer
is necessary for proper plant growth and production, balanced
application, particularly of P and K, should not be ignored while excessive
doses of N can result in greater disease intensity. Application of K, on the
other hand, has been recommended in cases where BS is a serious problem.
Some of these beneficial effects of fertilizer use, however, need to be
confirmed.
Proper choice of planting time - In areas where the weather pattern and
disease cycle are known, it is possible to adjust the planting time to escape the
peak disease period. If the cold season begins in October, this will result in BI
and sheath rot. Therefore, varieties should either be planted early or early
duration varieties used, sO that the crop will mature before the unfavorable
season sets in.
Appropriate crop rotation Diseases can be minimized by breaking the
continuity of the pathogen. Therefore, unless R varieties are grown, it is
preferable to grow one crop of rice in the most favorable period and to grow a
different crop in the following season. The best example is the Sahelian zone
where a good rice crop can be grown between June and October followed by
a good wheat crop in NovemberFebruary.



80 RICE IMPROVEMENT IN EASTERN, CENTRAL.. AND: SOUTHERN. AFRICA
Quarantine - Legislative control of plant pathogens, nematodes, and stored
grain pests is an effective tool in preventing their spread in new areas.
Phytosanitary and quarantine regulations are rigidly implemented in several
countries. Thus, while exchange of germplasm is one of the important steps
for crop improvement, this should be done under an effective and speedy
plant quarantine umbrella.
CONCLUSIONS
Considering the differences in species of insect pests and disease pathosystems
in Africa and elsewhere, genetic improvement must be geared toward resistance
breeding. More information on the prevalence, incidence, and extent of damage
by insect pests and diseases is needed, especially for central, east, and northern
African countries. WARDA has been monitoring the pests and diseases in its
member states in West Africa; however, in-depth studies are still needed on the
biology and epidemiology of pathogens, and the biology, ecology, and economic
threshold of important insect pests, since these components are essential for a
sound resistance breeding program and for an effective IPM approach.
Another very important need is for close, continuous monitoring of potentially
destructive diseases, such as BLB, virus diseases, and of potential insect pests.
The fact that virus vectors, such as BPH and GLH, have been reported in Africa
underscores this need.
One can safely conçclude that the need for more in-depth research on the
insects and diseases of rice in Africa is imperative. Thus, the international research
centers, such as IITA, IRRI, and WARDA, and regional centers in many African
countries need to help African national programs independently and in collabora-
tion in their respective areas of competency and mandate.
REFERENCES CITED
1. Agyen-Sampong, M. 1973. Insect pests of rice in Ghana and their control. A paper presented at
WARDA Seminar on plant protection for rice crop. 21-29 May 1973. Monrovia, Liberia.
2. Agyen-Sampong, M. 1982. The major pest problems of irrigated, upland and mangrove swamp
rice ecosystems in the humid tropical, Guinea savana and sahel climatic zones. Pages 318-328 in
Proc. of a course of Integrated Pest Management in Rice in Africa. 10-28 Jan 1982. WARDA,
Monrovia, Liberia.
3. Agyen-Sampong, M. 1982. Status and prospects of rice integrated pest management in the humid
tropical zones. Pages 329-338 in Proc. of a course on integrated pest management in rice in West
Africa. 10-28. Jan 1982, Monrovia. Liberia.
4. Akibo-Betts, D.T., and S. A Raymund. 1980. Aphids as rice pests in Sierra Leone. Int. Rice Res.
Newsl. 3(6):15-6.
5. Akibo-Betts, D.T., J. W. Gibbons, M.S. Alam, and Y. Efron. 1983. Aphids on rice roots. IITA Res.
Briefs 4:1-3.
6. Akinsola, EA. 1979. The biology and ecology of rice stem borers in Nigeria. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Ibadan, Nigeria. p. 217.



INSECT PESTS AND DISEASES OF RICE IN AFRICA 81
7. Akinsola, E. A., and M. Agyen-Sampong. 1982. The ecology, bionomics and control of rice stem
borers in West Africa. A paper presented at the international study workshop on crop borers and
emerging strategies for their control. 14-19 Jun 1982. ICIPE, Mbita Point Field Station, Kenya.
8. Alam, MS., J. W. Gibbons, D. T. Akibo-Betts, K. Wasano, Kaung Zan, and Y. Efron. 1983.
Hopperbum in rice caused by brown planthopper. IITA Res. Briefs 4:1-3.
9. Alam, M.S., and D.T. Akibo-Betts. 1984. Field and storage insect pests of rice and their control. In
Rice production manual. IITA, Ibadan, Nigeria (in press).
10. Alluri, K., and MS. Alam. 1982. Genetic research in rice at the International Institute of Tropical
Agriculture. A paper presented at the Third FAO/SIDA Seminar on Field crops in Africa and the
Near East, Nairobi, Kenya, 6-24 Jun 1982.
11. Alghali, MA. 1981. Studies on the relative susceptibility of rice varieties to. Diopsis thoracica west
(Diptera, Diopsidae). Ph.D. thesis. University of Ibadan. p. 191.
12. Anonymous. 1963. CAB (1951-74). Distribution maps of insect pests series A. (Agriculture). CIE
MapNo.A 171.
13. Barr, B.A.. C.S. Koechler, and R.F. Smith. 1975. Crop losses to insects, diseases, weeds and other
pests. UC/AID Pest Management and Related Environmental Protection Proj., Univ. of California,
Berkeley.
14. Benzi. M. 1980. Rice entomology in Upper Volta. WARDA Annual Rice Review, APR/80/7
Monrovia, Liberia.
15. Bidaux, J.M. 1978. Screening for horizontal resistance to rice blast (Pyricularia oryzae) in Africa. In
LW. Buddenhagen and G.J. Persley, ed. Rice in Africa. Academic Press, N.Y. 356 p.
16. Bottrell, D.G. 1979. Integrated pest management. Rep for council Environ. Quality, U.S.
Government Printing Office No. 041-011-00049-1. Washington, D.C.
17. Breniere, J. 1973. The main rice parasites in West Africa and their control. A paper presented at the
WARDA Seminar on plant protection for rice crop. 21-29 May 1973 Monrovia, Liberia.
18. Breniere, J. 1976. The principal insect pests of rice in West Africa and their control. WARDA,
Monrovia, Liberia, p. 52.
19. Cramer, H.H. 1967. Plant protection and world crop production. Pflanzer Schutz Nactrol. Bayer
20:1-525.
20. Diop, T. 1978. Entomological problems in the rice areas of SEAD. Monograph. p. 15.
21. Fennah, R.G. 1958. Fulgoridea from West Africa. Bull. de I'Institut Fondamental d'Afrique Noire
Series A 20:460-538.
22. Flint, M.L, and Van den Bosch R. 1981. Introduction to integrated pest management. Plenum Press,
New York. 240 P.
23. Grist, D.P., and R.A.W. Lever. 1969. Pests of rice. Longmans, Green & Co. Ltd. London. p. 520.
24. Heinrichs, E.A., R.C. Saxena, and S. Chelliah. 1979. Development and implementation of insect
pest management systems for rice in tropical Asia. Food and Fertilizer Technology Centre.
Extension Bulletin No. 127.
25. Hill, D.S. 1975. Agricultural insect pests of the tropicsand their control. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge London. P. 516.
26. Ho, D.T., J.J. Njokah, and J.G. Kibuka. 1983. Studies on rice stem borers in Kenya with emphasis
on Maliarpha separatella Rag. Insect. Sc. & Its Application. 4:1, 2.
27. International Institute of Tropical Agriculture. 1975. Annual report for 1974. Ibadan, Nigeria.
28. International Institute of Tropical Agriculture. 1976. Annual report for 1975. Ibadan, Nigeria.
29. International Institute of Tropical Agriculture. 1977. Annual report for 1976. Ibadan, Nigeria.
30. International Institute of Tropical Agriculture. 1983 Annual report for 1982. Ibadan, Nigeria.
31. International Institute of Tropical Agriculture, 1984. Annual report for 1983. (in press).
32. International Rice Research Institute. 1980. Standard Evaluation System for Rice. 44 p.
33. John, V.T., G. Thottapilly, and V.A. Awoderu. 1984 Occurrence of rice yellow mottle virus in some
Sahelian countries in West Africa. FAO. Plant Prot. Bull. (Accepted for publication),
34. Ngala, G.N. 1982. Studies on grain and panicle disease of rice, M. Phil. thesis, University of Ibadan.
35. Ou, S.H. 1972. Rice diseases. Commonwealth Mycological Institute, England. 368 p.
36. Pathak, M.D., and R.C. Saxena. 1978. Wiley Inter. Science, New York.
37. Pollet, A 1979. Insect actions and real economic losses from Maliarpha separatella, first borer of
lowland rice in central Ivory Coast. ORSTOM, Ivory Coast.



82 RICE IMPROVEMENT IN EASTERN, CENTRAL, AND SOUTHERN AFRICA
38. Soto, P.E., and Z. Siddiqi. 1976. Screening for resistance to African insect pests. A paperpresented
at the WARDA Varietal Improvement Seminar. Bouake, Ivory Coast.
39. Soto, P.E., and Z. Siddiqi. 1978. Insect pests and rice cultivation in Africa. Pages 175-180 in IW.
Buddenhagen and G.J. Persley, ed. Rice in Africa. Academic Press. New York. 356 p.
40. West African Rice Development Association. 1982. Report of monitoring tour 1977/78, Monrovia,
Liberia.
41. Zan, K., A.T. Perez, K. Alluri, and N.Q Ng. 1981. Problems and approaches on genetic
improvements of rice in sub-Sahelian Africa. Mimeographed report.